Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to analyse an
algorithm
Generally two major factors are used to analyse any algorithm
one is time
That is how much time and algorithm takes to produce
the desired output and the second one is space
That is how much memory space the algorithm consumes to
produce the desired output
So first let us understand how to analyse the time
complexity of an algorithm
So the time complexity of an algorithm depends on various
factors such as machine architecture that is whether a machine
is a 32 bit architecture or a 64 bit architecture
Then on the processor of that the machine has that
is a machine can have a single core processor or
multi core processor then it depends on the execution type
that is the machine can execute instructions one by one
sequentially or it can execute multiple instructions parallely
Then the time complexity depends on the machine's memory access
time
That is how faster machine can read or write data
to or from the memory
And the last one is what input we're giving to
a particular algorithm
And when we analyse the time complexity of an algorithm
we do not bother about all these factors such as
machine architecture processor of its execution etc because these are
machine dependent factors which memory from machine to machine
So in general we analyse the time complexity of an
algorithm based on the given input that is for given
input how much time and space the algorithm takes to
produce the desired output
And every machine is unique in its own way
Some machines can have sequential execution in some other machines
can have parallel execution and we can't analyse the algorithm
for every individual machine
So let us first built our model machine to an analyse
the algorithm and our model machine will have these
features
It is said 32
Bit Architecture Machine has a single coreprocessor
It will execute instructions sequentially that is one after one
manner and it takes one unit of time for the
basic operations like read write assignment and return statements
For example the instruction int i equal to zero takes one
unit of time and the statement return zero also takes
one unit of time
So these kind of basic operations will take one unit
of time and to make the analysing even simpler
We can make the assumption that every simple statement takes
one unit of time
For example this is a statement with three assignments but
still we can assume it takes one unit time as
it is a simple statement
Say another statement
Here here we have multiple arithmetic operations but again by
our assumption it takes one unit of time
Similarly this statement will also take one unit of time
So that is our model machine
Now let us analyse the time and space complexity of
the swapping algorithm with our model machine
First let us talk about the time complexity
First we have temp equal to a and this is
a simple statement
Hence it takes one unit of time
Next statement is a equal to b again
It is a simple assignment statement so it also takes
one unit of time
The third statement is b equal to temp again
It will take one unit of time
So what is the total time taken It is t
of X equal to one plus one plus one
That is the time complexity function to T of x equal do
three which means whatever may be the value of X
The T of X function will remain in some constant
value
Say this graph for every value of X the T
of X value remains constant so we can call this
algorithm as a constant time algorithm
So that time complexity of the swapping algorithm is order
of one which means that time complexity does not depend
on the given input
In this algorithm it will remain constant for any given
input
In general we used this big O notation to represent the
time complexity
But we also have other notations like Theta Omega
We will learn about them in the coming lessons
So that was the time complexity
Now let us discuss about the space complexity in the
swap function
We have two parameters Variables A and B
So let us
say a takes one unit of memory and b
also takes one unit of memory
Then in the first statement we have TEMP equal to
a that is
There is a new variable other than A and B and
it will also take one unit of memory and the
next statement equal to b And we have already taken
A and B so there is no issue and next
we have be equal temp again
Both b and temp are already considered so that so
So the total memory taken by this swap algorithm is
one plus one plus one that is three units of
memory
So space complexity s of X is equal to three which
is also a constant
So this algorithm takes only a fixed amount of memory
and the space complexity is order of one
So that was the time and space complexity and analysis
of the swapping algorithm which is a very simple
algorithm
And we got time and space complexity is equal to
order of one
They will discuss more complex algorithms and its analysis in
the upcoming videos